---
layout: blog
title: Dune 1.9.0
author: TheLortex
tags: [ocaml, dune]
---

# Dune 1.9.0

The dune team is pleased to announce the dune 1.9.0 release which introduces the concept of library variants. Changes include:
* Coloring in the watch mode ([#1956](https://github.com/ocaml/dune/pull/1956))
* `$ dune init` command to create or update project boilerplate ([#1448](https://github.com/ocaml/dune/pull/1448))
* Allow "." in c_names and cxx_names ([#2036](https://github.com/ocaml/dune/pull/2036))
* Experimental Coq support
* Support for library variants and default implementations ([#1900](https://github.com/ocaml/dune/pull/1900))

## Variants

In dune 1.7.0, the concept of virtual library was introduced: https://dune.build/blog/virtual-libraries/. This feature allows to mark some abstract library as virtual, and then have several implementations for it. These implementations could be for multiple targets (`unix`, `xen`, `js`), using different algorithms, using C code or not. However each implementation in a project dependency tree had to be manually selected. Dune 1.9.0 introduces features for automatic selection of implementations.

### Library variants

Variants is a tagging mechanism to select implementations on the final linking step. There's not much to add to make your implementation use variants. For example, you could decide to design a `bar_js` library which is the javascript implementation of `bar`, a virtual library. All you need to do is specificy a `js` tag using the `variant` option.
```
(library
 (name bar_js)
 (implements bar)
 (variant js)); <-- variant specification
```

Now any executable that depend on `bar` can automatically select the `bar_js` library variant using the `variants` option in the dune file.
```
(executable
 (name foo)
 (libraries bar baz)
 (variants js)); <-- variants selection
```

### Common variants

#### Language selection

In your projects you might want to trade off speed for portability:
* `ocaml`: pure OCaml
* `c`: OCaml accelerated by C


#### JavaScript backend

* `js`: code aiming for a Node backend, using `Js_of_ocaml`


### Mirage backends

The Mirage project ([mirage.io](https://mirage.io/)) will make extensive use of this feature in order to select the appropriate dependencies according to the selected backend.
* `unix`: Unikernels as Unix applications, running on top of `mirage-unix`
* `xen`: Xen backend, on top of `mirage-xen`
* `freestanding`: Freestanding backend, on top of `mirage-solo5`

### Default implementation

To facilitate the transition from normal libraries into virtuals ones, it's possible to specify an implementation that is selected by default. This default implementation is selected if no implementation is chosen after variant resolution.

```
(library
 (name bar)
 (virtual_modules hello)
 (default_implementation bar_unix)); <-- default implementation selection
```


### Selection mechanism

Implementation is done with respect to some priority rules:
* manual selection of an implementation overrides everything
* after that comes selection by variants
* finally unimplemented virtual libraries can select their default implementation


Libraries may depend on specific implementations but this is not recommended. In this case, several things can happen:
* the implementation conflicts with a manually selected implementation: resolution fails.
* the implementation overrides variants and default implementations: a cycle check is done and this either resolves or fails.

### Conclusion

Variant libraries and default implementations are fully [documented here](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/latest/variants.html). This feature improves the usability of virtual libraries.

This [commit](https://github.com/dune-universe/mirage-entropy/commit/576d25d79e3117bba64355ae73597651cfd27631) shows the amount of changes needed to make a virtual library use variants.

## Coq support

Dune now supports building Coq projects. To enable the experimental Coq
extension, add `(using coq 0.1)` to your `dune-project` file. Then,
you can use the `(coqlib ...)` stanza to declare Coq libraries.

A typical `dune` file for a Coq project will look like:

```
(include_subdirs qualified) ; Use if your development is based on sub directories

(coqlib
  (name Equations)                  ; Name of wrapper module
  (public_name equations.Equations) ; Generate an .install file
  (synopsis "Equations Plugin")     ; Synopsis
  (libraries equations.plugin)      ; ML dependencies (for plugins)
  (modules :standard \ IdDec)       ; modules to build
  (flags -w -notation-override))    ; coqc flags
```

See the [documentation of the
extension](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/latest/coq.html) for more
details.
